---
layout: default
title: Mapping Algorythms
---
<a href="{{ "/" | relative_url }}">{{ site.theme_config.back_home_text }}</a>
<h2>Listening to Listening: Mapping Urban ‘Algorhythms’</h2>


<iframe width="100%" height="300" scrolling="no" frameborder="no" allow="autoplay" src="https://w.soundcloud.com/player/?url=https%3A//api.soundcloud.com/playlists/1507251649&color=%238507df&auto_play=false&hide_related=false&show_comments=true&show_user=true&show_reposts=false&show_teaser=true&visual=true"></iframe><div style="font-size: 10px; color: #cccccc;line-break: anywhere;word-break: normal;overflow: hidden;white-space: nowrap;text-overflow: ellipsis; font-family: Interstate,Lucida Grande,Lucida Sans Unicode,Lucida Sans,Garuda,Verdana,Tahoma,sans-serif;font-weight: 100;"><a href="https://soundcloud.com/tddbrk" title="tb" target="_blank" style="color: #cccccc; text-decoration: none;">tb</a> · <a href="https://soundcloud.com/tddbrk/sets/portofbeing" title="Port of Being" target="_blank" style="color: #cccccc; text-decoration: none;">Port of Being</a></div>


As a response to Ramji’s Port of Being, a field recording practice makes it possible to engage tactically with the spatial materialization of networks, which echo throughout the collection’s form and subject matter. While the poems are informed by field recording practices, if at times obliquely, their formal linguistic qualities provide a framework for attending closely to the aesthetic and political features of network infrastructures that are typically concealed from view. To partially grasp these rhythms, certain portable field recording devices have been designed to make audible the electromagnetic (EM) transmissions that emanate from surrounding technologies, such as power lines, tram lines, ubiquitous electronic devices and machines, and 2.4 GHz WIFI. One such device, called the ‘Detektor’ was developed by media theorists Shintaro Miyazaki and Martin Howse. Given that electronic circuits are easily transformed into sound waves, the Detektor functions as a transducer of EM transmissions from 100 megahertz (MHz) to 5 gigahertz (GHz) so that they can heard by human listeners, providing opportunities for insight into the constitution of these invisible forces that pass through public space. 

Ramji’s “Container” poems, whose grounded observations take the shape of a documentary field recording practice, reference various streets and locations throughout the city of Vancouver. Using the Detektor, which, as Miyazaki writes, allows for the “mapping of the transsonic info-sphere of everyday life,” I selected these locations for my personal listening practice to create a technical parallel with Ramji’s poetic-infrastructural investigation (518). As a listening device, the Detektor is attuned to the phenomenon of what Miyazaki calls “algorhythms”: the “vibrational, pulsed, and rhythmized signals” made up both by “transductions of physical fluctuations and their oscillations as well as by abstract and logical structures of mathematic calculations” (519). This concept draws upon both Walter Benjamin’s figure of the flaneur, a wandering figure who investigates the nature of daily life in the city, and “rhythmanalysis,” a framework first coined by Gaston Bachelard for analyzing the “micro-rhythmic properties of matter” and the processing and transformation of matter as rhythmic configurations (518). Bachelard’s conception of rhythmanalysis was later expanded by the sociologist Henri Lefebvre for documenting and analyzing the rhythms of urban space. According to Lefebvre’s theory, the experiential ‘moments’ that constitute the cyclicality of rhythms serve also as possibilities for discontinuity—in other words, a break from the banal everyday—through the production of difference within repetition.

In attending to these “algorhythms” through the Detektor device, my experiment performs a partial listening to Ramji’s listening practice; by revisiting the locations referenced through Ramji’s “Container” poems, I aimed to create a parallel process of listening to a specific layer of rhythms, which manifest themselves throughout the city. The experiment also centers around a situated listening to my own listening by reflecting on my relationship to public space throughout a process of listening(s), as well as acknowledging the underlying values and assumptions that are historically embedded within the design of recording technologies and their related practices. In this way, my experiment draws from Ramji’s poetics of networks, which is informed by the technical and theoretical discourses surrounding the role of technology in the context of both global and local systems that regulate materials and bodies. As Ramji explains in the notes to Port of Being, the poems in “Container” draw excerpts from media outlets such as The Guardian and the Vancouver Sun, while they also conclude with “analogies to a current or historical situation that echoes one in the bulk of the poem” (77). Throughout the section, the poems shift between drawing attention to the fundamental materials of urban and digital networks, such as the “conduits / under the roadwork for the flood water and fibre-optic cables” to their related imaginaries and ideologies—for instance, the personas of “progress and development” that  “crowdsurf over the Fraser / to beat East van rents”—which work to either obscure these material layers, or else render and mobilize them as socially meaningful (11). As such, the poems’ movement across time and space, and between the layers of the technical and the social, presents an occasion for an affective investigation into the ambiguities and tensions posed by network technologies in everyday life. In tandem with Ramji’s text, this experiment is also unconcerned with an objective or systematic analysis of these conditions. Rather, it is through a tactical engagement with listening to otherwise ‘inaudible’ frequencies—whether semiotic or technical—that this practice gestures toward an articulation of what may be revealed or concealed at the intersections of subjectivity and the surrounding infrastructure of network technologies. 

Although my experiment emphasizes the recording of electromagnetic frequencies across different spaces, I found it necessary to record these spaces acoustically in order to associate the sounds generated by the EM transmissions with their respective geographical locations. The referenced locations throughout Ramji’s “Container” poems include general areas, streets, as well as the names of companies and other prominent buildings and landmarks across Greater Vancouver. Rather than simply ‘capturing’ a location’s sound in isolation, the sonic process of traveling to, from, within, and between these locations prompted an awareness of the existence of constructed boundaries and transition points. In particular, the act of recording EM transmissions drew my attention to the role of transit infrastructure in drawing and traversing urban boundaries, which are inscribed and re-inscribed through the movements of thousands of commuters on a daily basis. 

Although the TransLink SkyTrain may not be considered a “wireless” network technology, the automatic regulation of the system’s trains rely on four vehicle control computer (VCC) systems, whose frequencies, among others, can be made audible with the Detektor, Upon entering one of the poems’ locations—Columbia station in New Westminster—the Detektor picked up on the various sonic shifts emanating from the assemblage of Compass Card machines, escalators, digital transit schedules, incoming and departing trains, as well as devices belonging to other commuters within the vicinity. 

This process of recording therefore points to moments in which the individual both intersects and is simultaneously subsumed by public network infrastructure. Switching from the Detektor’s ‘high-frequency’ recording mode to the low-frequency setting, which captures signals mostly in the magnetic field domain, further highlights the entanglements of bodies and networked systems. Recording EM emissions in the ‘low frequency’ domain depends on the recordist’s relational position in space, which creates a relatively isolated listening experience when out of range of other devices. Rather than having access to the broader cacophony of public sounds, the surrounding signal sources, including other people, animals, weather conditions, non-electronic machinery, and spatial acoustics, are rendered inaudible. In contrast, high-frequency recordings capture a broader range of emissions which, in most urban spaces, illuminate a complicated—and at times overwhelming—web of noise sources, which would be impossible to identify on an individual basis.  

Traversing both recording modes demonstrates different relationships between sound, the act of listening, and the process of orienting oneself through space. Acoustic sounds, including their manifestations as low-frequency vibrations, are crucial sensory markers for wayfinding in the city. For example, in any given space, acoustic sounds allow the listener to infer sensory details about the surrounding architecture, determine whether the space is indoors or outdoors, and identify the presence of various agents that concurrently occupy the space, all of which provide key insights into the broader context and social atmosphere of a particular building or neighborhood. Although EM sounds reveal other “algorhythmic” agents that also occupy and constitute these spaces, the act of listening to these forces, which are typically inaudible and invisible, challenges pre-determined models of acoustic-spatial orientation. Instead, the unfamiliarity of EM sounds demands more oblique and de-spatialized forms of investigation into the abstracted relationships between surrounding sources, including their potential distance from the listener. 

Orientation, specifically while listening to EM emissions, thus requires a process of cataloguing the distinct rhythms and textures of these sounds over a period of time within a particular space, while also resisting the need to map them neatly back onto acoustic equivalents. However, this identification is possible under certain circumstances. For instance, my experience of recording inside the Great Canadian Superstore on Grandview Highway drew my attention to the layers of activity emanating from the checkout counters. At the acoustic level, the collection of credit card readers and bar-code scanners produced only an intermittent beeping as customers scanned their products. In contrast, the EM sonic environment revealed the space to be significantly more cluttered, as competing frequencies indicated the presence of simultaneous computational activities, situating these everyday devices within a denser network of financial transaction and inventory regulation processes. 

Although the Detektor is designed to reveal the presence of surrounding EM transmissions, this “wireless” listening practice also emphasizes the ways in which the capacity for movement is delimited throughout public spaces. The differences between low-frequency and high-frequency recording, for example, demonstrates two ways in which listening to urban ‘algorhythms’ highlights the experience of being tethered within a dense network of more wires rather than fewer, which, as Adrian Mackenzie describes, is characteristic of ‘wirelessness’ as a contemporary condition (64). Although the ability to hear discrete EM signals does not necessarily parallel the existence of the kind of wired material connections that Nicole Starsosielski investigates in her analysis of submarine cables, it nevertheless gestures toward the potential for spatial-material relationships that would be otherwise unacknowledged. 

On one hand, as low-frequency recording relies upon the listener’s proximity to other devices, its capacity depends on a set of limitations and expectations —whether socially or physically—that are inextricable from the individual’s ability to move through particular spaces. For example, my recording kit consisting of the Detektor’s exposed circuit board, a set of wired headphones, and a Tascam portable recording device, is less discrete than the everyday smartphone. However, my ability to record the sounds of surveillance cameras positioned outside a social housing complex in New Westminster without being confronted is perhaps suggestive of the extent to which citizens may be limited or encouraged to interrogate these surrounding technologies, all of which enact various kinds of social control. Echoing Ramji’s concern for the underlying dynamics of bodies and technologies that often go unnoticed, listening closely to certain technologies as they are embedded in the everyday thus requires a practice of “dwelling,” or even intrusion, which, in effect, challenges norms and expectations around movement and the prescribed use of public space. 

On the other hand, high-frequency recording, which draws from a significantly broader sonic spectrum, positions the listener in direct relationship to a variety of agents and operations that are normally invisible over the course of a daily commute through the city. Because the claustrophobic quality of these sounds also resists attempts to make sense of the nature of their origins or activities, attending to their frequencies can potentially unsettle assumptions regarding the relationship between acoustic sound, transparency, and individual agency, as these forces both perpetually surround and potentially act upon the individual listener in space and time through multiple and unexamined ways. Although the density of noise obfuscates attempts to generate coherent meanings, a sensory awareness of this material complexity may also allow for alternative lines of inquiry concerned not only with the power dynamics between individuals within the context of a visible environment, but also the underlying technological forces that constitute these spaces.

Listening to the EM emissions of various technologies also emphasizes their respective capacities for regulating movement in space. While machines such as parking meters and Compass Card readers are embedded within the urban landscape in such a way that normalizes and naturalizes their daily operations without drawing significant attention, their sonic emissions point to the possibility of additional protocol layers that regulate individual movement beyond the machine’s immediate location as well as over longer stretches of time. Visible machines that openly invite frequent user interaction may be in communication with data-gathering apps or other computational systems, which are concealed at the point of transaction between user and machine. For example, the sonic texture of the EM emissions produced by a Compass Card reader contrasts with the audible beep that is intentionally designed to alert commuters who wish to pass through the transit station’s barriers. The difference between the two sonic experiences—acoustic and EM listening—thus highlight the potential disjunctions between electronic and computational functions; while the former is designed to communicate explicitly with users through sonic and visual cues, the latter layer is often relegated beneath the surface of everyday awareness.

Rather than evoke unnecessary suspicion or condemnation of these ubiquitous processes, this practice of EM listening reveals how a tactical listening practice may challenge dominant sensory paradigms for experiencing and conceptualizing urban space; as one such paradigm relies primarily on visuality, another presumes that the main purpose of listening is to identify causal relationships between sounds and their sources. Instead, it is through the various barriers posed by EM field-recording, which call for alternative forms of movement, attention, and relationships to public space, that network infrastructure can be grasped as both material and relational. Through listening, the “inconsistency and lack of containment” of wireless networks as they “float in a foam of other media, settings, environment, Internet, cities,” as Adrian Mackenzie writes, is thus made legible as a real-time sensory experience within a particular geographical location (10). Further, EM listening highlights Starosielski’s call for the shift from network topology as the “analysis of mathematical structure of connections” to topography, in which network infrastructure—in the form of cables, for instance—is understood instead in terms of its entanglements within “historical and geographic matrices” (22). 

While this EM field-recording practice draws upon Ramji’s poetic text, it is arguably less productive to compare the efficacy of poetry and field recording in terms of their investigations into the ‘objective’ reality of network infrastructure within the city of Vancouver (and beyond). Rather, through considering poetic language in tandem with sound, the two projects together gesture toward a practice of listening to networks that, as Brian House writes helps to “orient[s] us in respect to larger ecological systems of which we are already a part” yet does not aim to “capture” the act of listening by “abandoning the body and its present material entanglements” (161, 166). In these ways, the mythologies constructed around networks are not necessarily dismissed in favor of epistemological objectivism; instead, these network imaginaries can be understood as being constitutive of our contemporary experiences involving these technologies, and their related of living. Meanwhile, attending to those aspects of materiality that have been rendered abstract highlights the possibilities for which certain approaches to ‘listening’—whether poetically or sonically—can make legible technological contingencies and the apparatuses of power that operate through daily life, and even facilitate alternative configurations.  
